# A History of Mishaqqa
## The Beginning
The Endless Twilight once held only distant echoes of other worlds, unknowable realms long since passed into dust. After æons of emptiness, a pinprick of light shone through, and the Wellspring erupted, flooding the blank expanse and coalescing into the world.  For a time, this new place was pristine and untouched, a paradise that grew and took shape.

After an eternity, the Konun Oluhiyat awoke into a world teeming with life, watered and nurtured by the Wellspring.  They found themselves awake and alone, of one mind and many, left to their own devices by whatever had stirred them. They found joy in the world, and cared for it, calling upon the Wellspring to shape it gently as they saw fit.

Eventually, they longed to share their awakening.  They called through the Wellspring for companions, and it answered in the form of humans, who stepped nervously into the world.  The Konun Oluhiyat met them with joy, but humans could not comprehend their formless power, and named them as gods.  The eternal beings took in the simple creatures as a parent with an infant, and cared for them.

## The Dawn Awakening
Humans grew and flourished in this paradise, guided by their deities, who were benevolent and kind. The awakening of human curiosity caused a ripple in the Wellspring, which rolled outward across the world, and on into the Endless Twilight.  It rolled over the greatest of beasts and awakened them, forming the first dragons and simurghs, peris, deevs, marids, and ifrits. It also subtly changed the childlike humans as they grew in their curiosity.  They began to develop and grow, and under the eyes of the Konun Oluhiyat, to group together.  They became suspicious of others, and clung to their communities in small groups for protection, both from the newly awakened dragons, and each other.

Humans and dragons both called upon the Konun Oluhiyat for protection, and the gods heard their pleas, but even in their wisdom and knowledge, did not understand the power of the Wellspring.  Humanity’s urges and desires began to shape the gods themselves.  Their desire for protection, their need for food, their joy at the rising of the sun, their fear of beasts of the night, their uncertainty of the weather, their suspicions of and conflicts with each other, and their sorrow over the deaths of their kin, each of these needed to be addressed.  Gradually, the gods began to change and shape themselves into aspects in order to answer these prayers, forming their own thoughts and needs around these powerful emotions.

## The Wellspring Wars
After uncounted years, humanity had spread to all corners of the land, and had become diverse. The other races stayed small in number, with dragons and simurghs retreating to the farthest corners of the world. The djinnfolk (peris, deevs, marids, and ifrit) rose to serve the Konun Oluhiyat directly, becoming their messengers, eyes, and ears upon the world.  Humans were still simple creatures, despite their unconscious power to shape even the gods themselves.  As they became more numerous, however, their power to shape the gods gave rise to the need for more gods, and the Wellspring answered again.

The Konun Oluhiyat began to become more diverse, with more aspects, dreamt into being by humanity’s growing desire to shape the world around them.  Humans had begun to harness the power of death, collect their knowledge, build greater and larger cities, and turn these tools against each other. The Wellspring provided them with more aspects of the Konun Oluhiyat to bless these efforts.  Once again, this awakening rippled the Wellspring, and the resulting change in humanity brought forth the rise of large nations, who quickly began to ally against each other. It was during the time of these nascent kingdoms that humans first learned to directly harness the power of the Wellspring, and very quickly began to use it as both a primitive tool and weapon.

In the western lands, the peoples of Mehrbath built a nation that became the envy of the others.  Eventually, they chose to turn on their smaller neighbors, crushing and subsuming them. Having conquered those near them, they turned their sights on the largest other nations, the Sudrin and Achedo, seeking to crush their rivals and forge the First Empire to claim dominion over all the people of the world.  This war raged on for centuries, until gradually the Mehrbathi people’s mastery of the Wellspring outstripped the Sudrin and Achedo.

The two groups battled for an age, devastating each other to claim the world. Eventually, using the power of the Wellspring, the Mehrbathi crushed the Sudrin and Achedo and drove them into slavery. The First Empire ruled over all of mankind, and thus ended the Wellspring Wars.

## The Empire Wars
With no wars left to fight, the Mehrbathi eventually became fractured.  The First Empire they had built waned and collapsed, splitting into separate nations. These built upon the ruins of what had been, and soon enough began to test each other.  Though they were a diverse people, most of these kingdoms were ruled by a familial dynasty, and the nations began to view themselves along the lines of race.  Shulf'eta warred with Mah'teyar.  Mah'teyar warred with Aju'hulaam.  Aju'hulaam warred with Shulf'eta.  These conflicts grew ever more violent as nations divided against each other and allied with those they considered kin. Using the vast power of the Wellspring, the Mehrbathi nations began to shape themselves and the world around them, extending their lives and molding their slaves to better suit their needs.

The Konun Oluhiyat, ever watchful, played their own games with and among the mortals. One of them, Zhas’ni, the Whisperer in Shadow, began to gather humans to worship her exclusively, forging herself apart from the Konun Oluhiyat.

## The Shadows of Divinity 
Zhas’ni began to turn her followers against the Konun Oluhiyat, naming them pretenders and false idols. Her greatest influence was in the nation of Qal'mar, the greatest nation of Mah'teyar, and she lured them with promises of power. She tempted the djinnfolk to mingle with humans and leading the Mah’teyar to further shape themselves and their slaves. The other Konun Oluhiyat, blind to deception and betrayal from within, saw only the rise of a warring nation, and lent their strength to Aanyat, the preeminent Shulf'eta kingdom. These two empires toyed with each other, using their smaller neighbors as pawns.
	
Eventually, The Whisperer in Shadow saw an opportunity to strike.  She sought to claim control of the Wellspring for herself, but succeeded only in revealing her ambition and sparking a war among the Konun Oluhiyat. The fury of the others was swift, and she was banished from their presence, cast away into the Endless Twilight.  Her power, dimmed as it was, was not extinguished, though, and her hunger unquenched.

## The Kinslaying
Some centuries after this upheaval, Aanyat began subjugating Oluram, a peaceful nation of Meh'teyar and Aju'hulaam. For decades they encroached on Oluram's borders, attempting to dominate them.  Oluram fought back and sought to hold Aanyat at bay, but eventually Aanyat's patience grew thin.  Without warning, a great magic was worked that strained the Wellspring itself, and the capital city of Oluram was obliterated, torn from the face of Mishaqqa.  The power of this working was such that Zhas’ni’s prison in the Endless Twilight shattered, and she once again came to plague the world.

With Oluram’s resistance crushed, Aanyat swept across the rest of the nation and scattered or subjugated all before them. Using this event as a pretext for retaliation, Qal'mar turned its full fury against Aanyat in a war known as the Kinslaying. This war eventually consumed all of the other nations, plunging the entirety of Mishaqqa into conflict.  Borders shifted and nations were changed or consumed. Two centuries of brutal warfare culminated in a cataclysmic battle, in which the Konun Oluhiyat and mortals alike strode the battlefield. 

Zhas'ni and Ikaashivar dueled, each wounding the other, before the combined host of the Konun Oluhiyat intervened.  The Whisperer in Shadow was cast back into the Endless Twilight, and with her, what remained of the hosts of Qal'mar.  The gods, shaken and dismayed at what their interference had caused, vowed to retreat and not walk so openly among the peoples of the world. They became aloof, slowly changing their relationship with humans until they became a distant and mysterious divinity. They forbade the djinnfolk from mingling with humanity, and they too retreated from the world of humanity.

## The Breaking of the Wellspring
In the uneasy peace that followed, Aanyat was unable to oppress its neighbors through military dominance.  Wars were fought over territory, but never again for conquest.  Time would eventually take its toll, and after a millennia, Aanyat began to recede. Its leaders had long become a magocracy, and the greatest among them sought to prevent their inevitable decline. The mighty Shulf'eta mage and his apprentices crafted a ritual to directly harness the very power of the Wellspring, and seize it for themselves.  They were misguided, however, and failed to fully comprehend the scale of the power they were attempting to work.  As they completed their ritual, the Wellspring lost its shape and form, beginning to drain away into whatever lay beyond.  In desperation, one of the Konun Oluhiyat intervened and sacrificed their very essence to restore order to the Wellspring, returning to the world as Qizhal and forever altering the nature of humanity’s ability to fully access the power of the Wellspring. 

As the previous ripples in the Wellspring had shaped and moved the world, this event devastated it.  Magic failed and nations collapsed. The other tribes, long enslaved, rose up against their Mehrbathi masters, and the world was plunged again into total war and chaos.  

## The Age of a Thousand Shahs
Over the next few centuries, what remained of the Mehrbathi had fled to the distant corners of Mishaqqa, and the other tribes began to rebuild from the ashes.  As mortals are wont to do, they broke along racial lines and each claimed a corner of the world for themselves.  For nearly a thousand years, they have ruled over their parts of Mishaqqa, and shaped the world to their own ends.
